Server SHOULD send full-sized datagrams until the path is validated (#4188)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

that contain packets that are successfully processed and datagrams that contain
packets that are all discarded.

Clients MUST and servers SHOULD ensure that UDP datagrams containing Initial
packets have UDP payloads of at least 1200 bytes, adding PADDING frames as

> necessary.  A client that sends padded datagrams allows the server to send more

Author: Maybe it would be better to limit the scope and say _servers SHOULD pad Initial packets that carry crypto data_.

The problem of padding all Initial packets is that ACK-only Initial packets consume full MTU, when the send window is still controlled by the amplification limit.

Reviewer: I think making a carve-out for ACK-only packets sounds attractive, but it could result in the client sending an Initial, getting it acknowledged, but not receiving the server's Initial.  Then things get complex to reason about.

Reviewer 2: Endpoints that don't coalesce are already trading performance for simplicity. The added sacrifice here isn't that large.

1) Clients: if it only receives an Initial, padding is critical to raising the amplification limit. If it gets a Handshake packet too, it will momentarily send a Handshake ACK that will allow it to free the Initial context and get the cwnd back.

2) Servers: If the client has a valid Retry or NEW_TOKEN token, there is no amplification limit. So the performance penalty only applies to a non-coalescing server when:
(a) There is no token, AND the Initial padding causes the handshake flight to go over the amplification limit.
(b) The initial padding causes the handshake flight to go over the initial cwnd.
I find it hard to believe a server deeply concerned about these losses would not coalesce packets for other reasons.

> Clients MUST and servers SHOULD ensure that UDP datagrams containing Initial
> packets have UDP payloads of at least 1200 bytes, adding PADDING frames as
> necessary.  A client that sends padded datagrams allows the server to send more

Reviewer: @martinduke suggestion:

```suggestion
Any datagram that contains an Initial packet MUST be at least 1200 Bytes unless the packet contains
a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.  A client that sends padded datagrams allows the server to send more
```

> data prior to completing address validation.  Endpoints using UDP datagrams of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
data prior to completing address validation.  Endpoints sending UDP datagrams of
```

packets that are all discarded.

Clients MUST ensure that UDP datagrams containing Initial packets have UDP

> payloads of at least 1200 bytes, adding PADDING frames as necessary.  Servers
> MUST ensure that UDP datagrams containing ack-eliciting Initial packets have UDP
> payloads of at least 1200 bytes.  A client that sends padded datagrams allows
> the server to send more data prior to completing address validation.  Endpoints
> sending UDP datagrams of at least 1200 bytes ensures that the handshake
> progresses only if the path is capable of handling QUIC traffic; see
> {{packet-size}}.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
payloads of at least 1200 bytes, adding PADDING frames as necessary.  Servers
MUST ensure that UDP datagrams containing ack-eliciting Initial packets have UDP
payloads of at least 1200 bytes. Sending UDP datagrams of at least 1200 bytes
ensures that the handshake progresses only if the path is capable of handling
QUIC traffic; see {{packet-size}}. Additionally, a client that sends padded
datagrams allows the server to send more data prior to completing address
validation.
```

Reviewer 4: In addition, let's remove the server text from here, since that is unnecessary for address validation. The server datagram padding needs to only be mentioned below, in the Initial Packet Size section.

Author: @janaiyengar Following your last comment, I've reverted the changes to this section (i.e. address validation). That means that the suggested change right above is not applied. Please see if you want anything to be resurrected.

{{validate-retry}}) or in a previous connection using the NEW_TOKEN frame (see
{{validate-future}}).

> Until the path is validated, a server SHOULD pad the Initial, Handshake, 1-RTT

Reviewer 5: You need to pad Handshake packets, if you consistently pad Initials: Without the ServerHello, the client won't be able to decrypt the Handshake packet.

Author: This is necessary to prevent the ping-pong that is being described in [the issue](https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/issues/4183#issue-715343219) which is caused by the receipt of a Handshake packet triggering a retransmission.

Reviewer 5: If you pad all Initial packets (meaning: all datagrams containing Initial), you don't need to pad Handshake packets. An undecryptable packet doesn't reset any timers, so if won't lead to the ping-pong you describe.

This is easier to implement (for me at least), since I can use the same logic for packing packets on the client and server side: Pad all packets that contain an Initial.

Reviewer 6: I agree with @marten-seemann. If the first flight pads in both directions, ACKs of those packets should be enough to validate the 1200 MTU requirement, and further packets shouldn't be required to pad, right?

Author: @marten-seemann @nibanks I'm not sure if I agree.

Let me start by pointing out the basics that I think is true, before I dive into the details of the recovery draft:
* When the path MTU is below 1200 bytes, it is better to make sure that none of the packets reach the client rather than letting some pass through, because client might extend their timeout if they receive some packets from the server.
* Machinery defined in the transport draft should not depend on the specifics of the recovery draft.
* What we are trying to provide is a recommendation (SHOULD), and that should be the best practice rather than the minimum that an endpoint is supposed to do. And because it is merely a recommendation, endpoints can adopt alternative strategies.

Regarding the specifics of the recovery draft, [the second paragraph of the recovery draft](https://quicwg.org/base-drafts/draft-ietf-quic-recovery.html#section-6.2.3-2) states that an server MAY retransmit CRYPTO data before the PTO timer expires, when it receives an Initial packet containing duplicate CRYPTO data.

The question is if this paragraph prohibits servers from retransmitting Handshake packets (or 1-RTT packets) containing CRYPTO data. If such action is prohibited, then we will not have ping-pong. If such action is _not_ prohibited, we might see ping-ping if we only pad datagrams carrying Initial packets. That is because if only the Handshake packets (or the 1-RTT packets) reach the client, the client is explicitly allowed to retransmit Initial packets containing CRYPTO data.

My understanding is that such action is _not_ prohibited. In fact, I would argue that the intent of this section is to allow such an action.

Consider the case where the server sent three datagrams in its first flight: 1) a full-sized datagram carrying an Initial and a Handshake packet, 2) a full-sized datagram carrying a Handshake packet, 3) a half-sized datagram carrying a Handshake packet.

When the server receives an Initial carrying duplicate CRYPTO data, the draft states that it can assume that the Initial that the server sent has been lost. What does that exactly mean? The natural assumption would be that either or both of datagrams _2_ and _3_ reached the client, but _1_ did not. It is far less likely that the client received all the three datagrams, but there was a bit flip in the Initial packet, and that the client is buffering the Handshake packets it was unable to decrypt.

Then, why should a server limit the retransmission to only Initial data?

To summarize, my understanding is that section 6.2.3 of the recovery draft suggests that the server MAY retransmit Handshake packets when receiving an Initial packet that contain duplicate CRYPTO data. Therefore, there's the possibility that we would see a ping-pong even with a server that is following the recommendations in the recovery draft, unless it pads all packets that it sends until the path is validated.

> packets it sends so that their UDP payload size will be at least 1200 bytes.

Author: The server cannot pad Retry packets.

> Until the path is validated, a server SHOULD pad the Initial, Handshake, 1-RTT
> packets it sends so that their UDP payload size will be at least 1200 bytes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Until the path is validated, a server SHOULD pad all packets it sends, other
than Retry, so that their UDP payload size will be at least 1200 bytes.
```

> containing Initial packets have UDP payloads of at least 1200 bytes.  Doing so

Reviewer 4: I would revert this to what you had earlier... I don't think there's a good reason to not recommend padding all packets, since client behavior is uncertain here. The SHOULD here means that implementations can deviate from this recommendation, as long as they know what they're doing.

Reviewer 5: Retry can validate the client's address, so the ping-pong could still happen in that case.

Author: @marten-seemann Wow. That's true. Addressed in bd089c9.

Doing so guarantees that the handshake would make progress only when the path is

> capable of handling QUIC traffic (see {{packet-size}}).

Reviewer 3: Maybe also:

```suggestion
capable of handling QUIC traffic in both directions; see {{packet-size}}.
```

A client MUST expand the payload of all UDP datagrams carrying Initial packets
to at least the smallest allowed maximum packet size (1200 bytes) by adding
PADDING frames to the Initial packet or by coalescing the Initial packet; see
{{packet-coalesce}}.  Similarly, a server MUST expand the payload of all UDP
datagrams carrying ack-eliciting Initial packets.  Sending UDP datagrams of this
size ensures that the network path supports a reasonable Path Maximum
Transmission Unit (PMTU), in both directions.  Additionally, a client padding
Initial packets helps reduce the amplitude of amplification attacks caused by

> server responses toward an unverified client address; see

Reviewer 4: Can you spell it out fully for the server? "A server MUST similarly expand the payload of all UDP datagrams carrying ack-eliciting Initial packets to at least the smallest allowed maximum packet size (1200 bytes)."

Also, "a client padding Initial packets" --> "a client that expands Initial packets"

Author: Thank you for the suggestions. Done in c550cb4.

{{address-validation}}.

> Datagrams containing Initial packets MAY exceed 1200 bytes if the endpoint

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Datagrams containing Initial packets MAY exceed 1200 bytes if the sender
```

believes that the network path and peer both support the size that it chooses.

A server MUST discard an Initial packet that is carried in a UDP datagram with a
payload that is less than the smallest allowed maximum packet size of 1200
bytes.  A server MAY also immediately close the connection by sending a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an error code of PROTOCOL_VIOLATION; see
{{immediate-close-hs}}.  When a client receives an ack-eliciting Initial packet
that is carried in a UDP datagram with a payload that is less than 1200 bytes,
that client MAY close the connection by sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.

The server MUST also limit the number of bytes it sends before validating the

> address of the client, and MUST pad ack-eliciting Initial packets that it sends;
> see {{address-validation}}.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
address of the client; see {{address-validation}}.
```

I don't think you need this here, since this is described earlier in this very section.

CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an error code of PROTOCOL_VIOLATION; see
{{immediate-close-hs}}.

> Until the server validates the client address, it MUST limit the

Reviewer: I don't think this change is necessary anymore.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @martinthomson. The amplification limit disappears when the server validates the address. The padding requirement/recommendation applies to all Initial packets, because you still have to probe the MTU, and the client is often not sure if the server has validated it.

Author: Thank you folks. I think there's consensus that padding should better not be tied to path validation. Addressed the text in 0410b60. PTAL.

> the number of bytes it sends and SHOULD pad the Initial packets; see

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the number of bytes it sends and SHOULD pad Initial packets; see
```

CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an error code of PROTOCOL_VIOLATION; see
{{immediate-close-hs}}.

> Until the server validates the client address, a server MUST also limit the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Until the server validates the client address, it MUST limit the
```

> the number of bytes it sends and SHOULD pad the Initial packets; see
> {{address-validation}}.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
number of bytes it sends, and it SHOULD ensure that the UDP
payload of all datagrams it sends at least 1200 bytes; see
{{address-validation}}.
```

Reviewer 3: I want to keep the Initial piece.
